text/0000-more-iter-methods.md, before:

- Feature Name: more-iter-methods
- Start Date: 2016-10-16
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Pony Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC proposes the addition of various methods to the Iter class of the itertools package. The methods included are based on functions from [Rust's Iterator](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html) and [Elixir's Enum](http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html).

# Motivation

The purpose of these additional methods is to increase the functionality of the Iter class.

# Detailed design

The following methods will be added to the Iter class:
```pony
fun ref all(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Bool =>
    """
    Return false if at least one value of the iterator fails to match the
    predicate `f`, otherwise return true.
    """

fun ref any(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Bool =>
    """
    Return true if at least one value of the iterator matches the predicate `f`,
    otherwise return false.
    """

fun ref collect[B: Seq[A!] = Array[A!]](coll: B): B^ =>
    """
    Push each value from the iterator into the collection `coll`.
    """

fun ref count(): USize =>
    """
    Return the number of values in the iterator.
    """

fun ref find(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box, n: USize = 1): A ? =>
    """
    Return the nth value in the iterator that satisfies the predicate `f`.
    """

fun ref last(): A ? =>
    """
    Return the last value of the iterator.
    """

fun ref nth(n: USize): A ? =>
    """
    Return the nth value of the iterator.
    """

fun ref skip(n: USize): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Skip the first n values of the iterator.
    """

fun ref skip_while(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Skip values of the iterator while the predicate `f` returns true.
    """

fun ref take(n: USize): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Return an iterator for the first n elements.
    """

fun ref take_while(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Return an iterator that returns values while the predicate `f` returns true.
    """

```

# How We Teach This

Since these are only additional methods for an existing class, the only requirement is that the methods are properly documented.

# How We Test This

Every method added must be tested to ensure that it works as expected. This includes testing for cases that may not behave as intended such as iterators with no values or predicates that may throw errors.

# Drawbacks

The additional code will add a slight maintenance cost.

# Alternatives

Other methods may be added in addition or as replacements to the ones described above.

# Unresolved questions

Are there other methods that should be considered?

Commit message:

Update testing and documentation requirements

text/0000-more-iter-methods.md, after:

- Feature Name: more-iter-methods
- Start Date: 2016-10-16
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Pony Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC proposes the addition of various methods to the Iter class of the itertools package. The methods included are based on functions from [Rust's Iterator](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html) and [Elixir's Enum](http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html).

# Motivation

The purpose of these additional methods is to increase the functionality of the Iter class.

# Detailed design

The following methods will be added to the Iter class:
```pony
fun ref all(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Bool =>
    """
    Return false if at least one value of the iterator fails to match the
    predicate `f`, otherwise return true.
    """

fun ref any(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Bool =>
    """
    Return true if at least one value of the iterator matches the predicate `f`,
    otherwise return false.
    """

fun ref collect[B: Seq[A!] = Array[A!]](coll: B): B^ =>
    """
    Push each value from the iterator into the collection `coll`.
    """

fun ref count(): USize =>
    """
    Return the number of values in the iterator.
    """

fun ref find(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box, n: USize = 1): A ? =>
    """
    Return the nth value in the iterator that satisfies the predicate `f`.
    """

fun ref last(): A ? =>
    """
    Return the last value of the iterator.
    """

fun ref nth(n: USize): A ? =>
    """
    Return the nth value of the iterator.
    """

fun ref skip(n: USize): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Skip the first n values of the iterator.
    """

fun ref skip_while(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Skip values of the iterator while the predicate `f` returns true.
    """

fun ref take(n: USize): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Return an iterator for the first n elements.
    """

fun ref take_while(f: {(A!): Bool ?} box): Iter[A]^ =>
    """
    Return an iterator that returns values while the predicate `f` returns true.
    """

```

# How We Teach This

The added methods must be properly documented and the top level package documentation of itertools should be updated to include the Iter class.

# How We Test This

Every method added must have a unit test to ensure that it works as expected. This includes testing for cases that may not behave as intended such as iterators with no values or predicates that may throw errors.

# Drawbacks

The additional code will add a slight maintenance cost.

# Alternatives

Other methods may be added in addition or as replacements to the ones described above.

# Unresolved questions

Are there other methods that should be considered?
