text/0000-packed-structs.md, before:

- Feature Name: packed-structs
- Start Date: 2016-12-25
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue:

# Summary

Add program annotations allowing programmers to declare packed structures, i.e. structures without implementation-specific padding between members.

# Motivation

In C, packed structures are a common idiom when doing I/O. Pony is currently unable to interface with this kind of structures, adding this capability would be good for the FFI and the language.

# Detailed design

The proposed annotation is `packed`, and would affect `struct` declarations:

```pony
struct \packed\ MyPackedStruct
  // Members.
```

The code generation for these structures will use LLVM's packed structures, which are very simple to use.

# How We Teach This

Plain structures aren't currently explained in the tutorial. We should add an explanation in the "Calling C from Pony" and describe packed structures in the same place. In particular we will stress that, as normal Pony structures should only be used with normal C structures, packed Pony structures should only be used with packed C structures.

# How We Test This

The implementation will directly map onto LLVM's facilities. We'll add some tests checking that the correct LLVM types are generated, to make sure nobody accidentaly breaks the implementation in the frontend.

# Alternatives

Not implementing this will leave the packed structures deficiency in the FFI unresolved.

# Unresolved questions

None.

Commit message:

Amend packed structures
Add details on what we should test.

text/0000-packed-structs.md, after:

- Feature Name: packed-structs
- Start Date: 2016-12-25
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue:

# Summary

Add program annotations allowing programmers to declare packed structures, i.e. structures without implementation-specific padding between members.

# Motivation

In C, packed structures are a common idiom when doing I/O. Pony is currently unable to interface with this kind of structures, adding this capability would be good for the FFI and the language.

# Detailed design

The proposed annotation is `packed`, and would affect `struct` declarations:

```pony
struct \packed\ MyPackedStruct
  // Members.
```

The code generation for these structures will use LLVM's packed structures, which are very simple to use.

# How We Teach This

Plain structures aren't currently explained in the tutorial. We should add an explanation in the "Calling C from Pony" and describe packed structures in the same place. In particular we will stress that, as normal Pony structures should only be used with normal C structures, packed Pony structures should only be used with packed C structures.

# How We Test This

The implementation will directly map onto LLVM's facilities and packed types. We'll add some tests checking that the LLVM type generated for a packed structure is indeed packed, to make sure nobody accidentaly breaks the implementation in the frontend.

# Alternatives

Not implementing this will leave the packed structures deficiency in the FFI unresolved.

# Unresolved questions

None.
