text/0000-try-else-and-drop-then.md, before:

- Feature Name: Try, else, no "then"
- Start Date: 2016-06-10
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue: #291

# Summary

Drop "then" clause from "try/else" clause.


# Motivation

Running a block of code upon scope exit is orthogonal to error
handling and has more to do with resource management.

The "with" statement already provides the necessary functionality for
obtaining and giving up a resource such as a lock or file handle. In
addition the "with" statement supports multiple such resources at the
same time without additional nesting.


# How We Teach This

In the documentation we need to talk about what resource management is
and how the "with" statement conceivably solves the problem. Since in
some languages exception handling is used for flow control it might
also be good to talk about this.


# Drawbacks

The main drawback is that code that uses "try/else/then" today will
need to be updated to use a "with" block which needs object support in
the form of a "dispose method".


# Unresolved questions

Currently none.

Commit message:

Add note on documentation section to be removed

text/0000-try-else-and-drop-then.md, after:

- Feature Name: Try, else, no "then"
- Start Date: 2016-06-10
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue: #291

# Summary

Drop "then" clause from "try/else" clause.


# Motivation

Running a block of code upon scope exit is orthogonal to error
handling and has more to do with resource management.

The "with" statement already provides the necessary functionality for
obtaining and giving up a resource such as a lock or file handle. In
addition the "with" statement supports multiple such resources at the
same time without additional nesting.


# How We Teach This

In the documentation we need to talk about what resource management is
and how the "with" statement conceivably solves the problem. Since in
some languages exception handling is used for flow control it might
also be good to talk about this.

The "Try-then blocks" section in the tutorial can be removed.


# Drawbacks

The main drawback is that code that uses "try/else/then" today will
need to be updated to use a "with" block which needs object support in
the form of a "dispose method".


# Unresolved questions

Currently none.
