text/0000-buffered-read-until.md, before:

- Feature Name: buffered_reader_read_until
- Start Date: 2016-09-19
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue:

# Summary

Add a method on ``buffered.Reader`` that reads the buffer until a given byte is found.

# Motivation

Some protocols in the wild define their messages using a separator byte. Some use null-terminated strings. With the current implementation of ``Reader``, there is no easy way to read this kind of input. This RFC purpose is to provide a simple and versatile way to extract this data.

Example of protocols that would benefit of this feature:

- Postgresql : https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/protocol-message-formats.html

# Detailed design

## API

``Reader`` exposes a

```pony
fun ref read_until(byte': U8, greedy: Bool=true): Array[U8] iso^ ?
```

method that returns the data from the current position to the first occurrence of the given ``byte'``. It raise an error if `byte'` can't be found.

The ``greedy`` parameter tells if the separator byte is included in the result (and incidently if it's consumed).

If it's ``true``, the default, the separator byte is read and returned at the end of the result ``Array[U8]``. The reader continues its operation from the position after the separator.

If it's ``false``, the separator is not included in the result. It is not read. It's not part of the result and, thereafter, it's the first available byte for the reader.

This adds versatility for corner cases without impacting the main use case.

## Implementation details

The implementation relies on a private method

```pony
fun ref _distance_of(byte': U8): USize ?
```

which has quite the exact same implementation as


```pony
fun ref _line_length(): USize ?
```

(https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/blob/master/packages/buffered/reader.pony#L532)

The only difference is that it  searches for the provide byte' rather than '\n'.

It returns the distance from the current position in the buffer to the first occurrence of the provided byte, or raise an error if that byte is not found.

## Usage example

```pony
String.from_array(reader.read_until(0)) // read a null-terminated string
reader.read_until(':') // read a field in a colon-separated chunk of data
reader.read_until(0, false) // read all the data before a small U32 i want to read. It's convoluted, I confess.
```

# How We Teach This

This has no impact on existing code. Add comprehensive method documentation and use the method in the package doc.

# Drawbacks

None

# Alternatives

The RFC started from this refused [pull-request](https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/pull/1239) that addresses a narrower use-case. We deemed it too specific.

# Unresolved questions

- Should we provide a more general method that search for as string rather than a single byte ?
  - What is the performance impact ? (we have to search across chunks of data)
- The name of the method is maybe not satisfying, I think. Non-native english speaker here, tell us if you can think of a better name.

Commit message:

The greedy parameter is history.

text/0000-buffered-read-until.md, after:

- Feature Name: buffered_reader_read_until
- Start Date: 2016-09-19
- RFC PR:
- Pony Issue:

# Summary

Add a method on ``buffered.Reader`` that reads the buffer until a given byte is found.

# Motivation

Some protocols in the wild define their messages using a separator byte. Some use null-terminated strings. With the current implementation of ``Reader``, there is no easy way to read this kind of input. This RFC purpose is to provide a simple and versatile way to extract this data.

Example of protocols that would benefit of this feature:

- Postgresql : https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/protocol-message-formats.html
  - specially for the messages that contain a null-terminated string in the middle of the data (`ErrorResponse`, `ParmeterStatus`...)

# Detailed design

## API

``Reader`` exposes a

```pony
fun ref read_until(byte': U8): Array[U8] iso^ ?
```

method that returns the data from the current position to the first occurrence of the given ``byte'``. The terminating byte is read, but not append in the result. Raise an error if `byte'` can't be found.


## Implementation details

The implementation relies on a private method

```pony
fun ref _distance_of(byte': U8): USize ?
```

which has quite the exact same implementation as


```pony
fun ref _line_length(): USize ?
```

(https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/blob/master/packages/buffered/reader.pony#L532)

The only difference is that it searches for the provided `byte'` rather than `'\n'`.

It returns the distance from the current position in the buffer to the first occurrence of the provided byte, or raise an error if that byte is not found.

## Usage example

```pony
String.from_array(reader.read_until(0)) // read a null-terminated string
reader.read_until(':') // read a field in a colon-separated chunk of data
reader.read_until(0, false) // read all the data before a small U32 i want to read. It's convoluted, I confess.
```

# How We Teach This

This has no impact on existing code. Add comprehensive method documentation and use the method in the package doc.

# Drawbacks

None

# Alternatives

- The RFC started from this refused [pull-request](https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/pull/1239) that addresses a narrower use-case. We deemed it too specific.

- In the first version of the RFC, `read_until` accepted a second argument:

```pony
fun ref read_until(byte': U8, greedy: Bool=true): Array[U8] iso^ ?
```

to let the user decide if the separator is included into the result or kept in the buffer for the next read operation. We found that this was inconsistent with `line()`'s behaviour for a very little gain.

# Unresolved questions

- Should we provide a more general method that search for as string rather than a single byte ?
  - What is the performance impact ? (we have to search across chunks of data)
  - Can we find an example of a protocol that use two-bytes separators other than CRLF (this special case is already handled by `line()`) ?
- The name of the method is maybe not satisfying, I think. Non-native English speaker here, tell us if you can think of a better name.
