text/0000-ponybench.md, before:

- Feature Name: ponybench
- Start Date: 2016-06-04
- RFC PR: 
- Pony Issue: 

# Summary

Ponybench provides a microbenchmarking facility that can be used to examine the performance of pony code. This gives users an opportunity to easily profile their programs, remove bottlenecks, and make them faster.

# Motivation

This package adds to the tooling around pony. Good tools support the language ecosystem and increase adoption.

# Detailed design

The PonyBench.apply behavior has the following signature:
```pony
be apply[A: Any #share](name: String, f: {(): A ?} val, ops: U64 = 0)
```
The amount of ops may be set manually, but by default it is handled automatically with the benchmark run for a minimum of 1 second by default. If the second has not elapsed when the Benchmark function returns, the amount of ops is increased in the sequence 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, … and the function is run again. A simple average (total execution time over ops) is used to calculate the execution time in nanoseconds.

```pony
actor Main
  new create(env: Env) =>
    let bench = PonyBench(env)
    bench[USize]("fib 5", lambda(): USize => Fib(5) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 10", lambda(): USize => Fib(10) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 20", lambda(): USize => Fib(20) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 40", lambda(): USize => Fib(40) end)
    bench[String]("fail", lambda(): String ? => error end)
    bench[USize]("add", lambda(): USize => 1 + 2 end, 1_000_000)
    bench[USize]("sub", lambda(): USize => 2 - 1 end, 1_000_000)

primitive Fib
  fun apply(n: USize): USize =>
    if n < 2 then
      n
    else
      apply(n-1) + apply(n-2)
    end

```
Output:
```
fib 5     50000000          33 ns/op
fib 10     5000000         352 ns/op
fib 20       30000       42951 ns/op
fib 40           2   646773866 ns/op
**** FAILED Benchmark: fail
add        1000000           2 ns/op
sub        1000000           2 ns/op
```
For example, this shows that the add function was executed 1,000,000 times and took an average of 2 ns/op).

There will also be an async behavior as follows:
```pony
be async[A: Any #share](name: String, f: {(): Promise[A] ?} val, timeout: U64 = 0, ops: U64 = 0)
```
which will calculate the average time until the Promise is fulfilled. If timeout is greater than 0, the benchmark will fail if the promise is not fulfilled within the time given.

The current proof of concept implentation can be found at [https://github.com/Theodus/ponybench](https://github.com/Theodus/ponybench)

# How We Teach This

Example use of the package should be included in the pony tutorial as well as the package docs, similar to ponytest.

# Drawbacks

None.

# Alternatives

None.

# Unresolved questions

- Should this be part of the current ponytest package?
- How may ponybench benchmark memory allocations?

Commit message:

specify when the timeout check occurs

text/0000-ponybench.md, after:

- Feature Name: ponybench
- Start Date: 2016-06-04
- RFC PR: 
- Pony Issue: 

# Summary

Ponybench provides a microbenchmarking facility that can be used to examine the performance of pony code. This gives users an opportunity to easily profile their programs, remove bottlenecks, and make them faster.

# Motivation

This package adds to the tooling around pony. Good tools support the language ecosystem and increase adoption.

# Detailed design

The PonyBench.apply behavior has the following signature:
```pony
be apply[A: Any #share](name: String, f: {(): A ?} val, ops: U64 = 0)
```
The amount of ops may be set manually, but by default it is handled automatically with the benchmark run for a minimum of 1 second by default. If the second has not elapsed when the Benchmark function returns, the amount of ops is increased in the sequence 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, … and the function is run again. A simple average (total execution time over ops) is used to calculate the execution time in nanoseconds.

```pony
actor Main
  new create(env: Env) =>
    let bench = PonyBench(env)
    bench[USize]("fib 5", lambda(): USize => Fib(5) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 10", lambda(): USize => Fib(10) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 20", lambda(): USize => Fib(20) end)
    bench[USize]("fib 40", lambda(): USize => Fib(40) end)
    bench[String]("fail", lambda(): String ? => error end)
    bench[USize]("add", lambda(): USize => 1 + 2 end, 1_000_000)
    bench[USize]("sub", lambda(): USize => 2 - 1 end, 1_000_000)

primitive Fib
  fun apply(n: USize): USize =>
    if n < 2 then
      n
    else
      apply(n-1) + apply(n-2)
    end

```
Output:
```
fib 5     50000000          33 ns/op
fib 10     5000000         352 ns/op
fib 20       30000       42951 ns/op
fib 40           2   646773866 ns/op
**** FAILED Benchmark: fail
add        1000000           2 ns/op
sub        1000000           2 ns/op
```
For example, this shows that the add function was executed 1,000,000 times and took an average of 2 ns/op).

There will also be an async behavior as follows:
```pony
be async[A: Any #share](name: String, f: {(): Promise[A] ?} val, timeout: U64 = 0, ops: U64 = 0)
```
which will calculate the average time until the Promise is fulfilled. If timeout is greater than 0, the benchmark will fail if the promise is not fulfilled within the time given. This check for timeout is done before the benchmarks are counted towards an average run time.

The current proof of concept implentation can be found at [https://github.com/Theodus/ponybench](https://github.com/Theodus/ponybench)

# How We Teach This

Example use of the package should be included in the pony tutorial as well as the package docs, similar to ponytest.

# Drawbacks

None.

# Alternatives

None.

# Unresolved questions

- Should this be part of the current ponytest package?
- How may ponybench benchmark memory allocations?
